Hello everybody. Welcome to a new episode of the,
the Center. I'm your host, Ricardo Lob. And today
I'm joined by Doctor Michael Hudson. He is president
of the Institute for the study of long term
economic trends and distinguished research professor of Economics at
the University of Missouri Kansas City. And today we're
focusing mostly on his book, The Collapse of Antiquity.
But we're also talking about a little bit about
and forgive them their debts. And also I would
also like to mention that Dr Hudson as a
new book, uh Temples of Enterprise. So Doctor Hudson,
welcome to the show. It's a pleasure to everyone.
Well, it's good to be here. Thank you for
inviting me.
So before we get into the collapse sovereignty with
the, since it is a sequel to your book
and forgive them their debts, I would like to
start by asking you a little bit about it
and particularly about the history of debt and its
cancellation, which is something that you cover a lot
in your first book of these trilogy. So how
old are the notions of debtors and creditors and
the relations between them?
Well, all early societies operated on credit long before
there was money, for instance, uh, their, their guilt.
Uh, IF you injured somebody, then you had to
pay them compensation. Uh, IF they hadn't, uh, arranged
that kind of, uh, uh, compensation, then there would
have and feud justice people would think. Well, you
injured a member of my family. I'm gonna injure,
uh, a member of yours. So people had to
pay Vergel. That meant man price, uh, for any
injury. Uh But because they didn't have money, it
was usually in the form of a uh set
uh a basket of commodities uh that they, they
would have uh there was broad price if uh
you would have a daughter getting married, uh you
had to provide a dowry for her. Uh But
even more important than that for all of the
indigenous societies, communities uh investigated by anthropologists, everybody was
in debt to everybody else through gift exchange. For
instance, even though uh the uh everybody was growing
crops uh for themselves, they would uh give crops
to a neighbor and a friends and that would
cause a reciprocal obligation to give their crops back.
And the whole idea of credit originally was to
integrate societies not drive them apart uh as today.
Well, gradually they uh co uh these societies developed
and the debts were bound uh to uh develop
more as you had a specialization of labor. And
that occurred primarily in Mesopotamia uh with, because that
had the large institutions, the uh temples and the
palaces. Uh And when you have large institutions, you
have to have resource allocation that meant you had
to have some standard of value to measure. And
the standard of value was uh for the domestic
agricultural sector, grains. Uh MANY of the rulers when
they would come in would announce a uh a
price schedule. Uh ONE unit of brain would be
equal to one shuttle of silver. So that there
would be a communication, sometimes they would add copper,
sometimes they would add wool, uh all sorts of
other things. So that there was generally a means
of transactions between the communal communal sector, the families
on the land and the the palaces and the
temples that had dependent labor, for instance, war widows
and orphans were uh working in, in the temples,
weaving textiles uh and other things. Uh But e
even before that you had the kind of depths
that were attached to the land and sometime in
the stone age land began to be assigned to
people. You couldn't just uh grab whoever uh settles
here first gets to keep the land. It was
all pretty homogeneous and land was assigned to citizens
on a fairly standardized uh unit in exchange for
the citizens liability to all the community. Two things,
the uh the uh the citizens had to fight
in the army after the, the men and they
had to work on the Corvey labor that is
for infrastructure projects. Uh And when the, they were
not working on the land to do harvesting, they
would be uh working on building irrigation ditches, building
the cigarette temple, pyramids, building the walls. Uh And
so the uh the land was allocated to families
so that they could feed themselves and have enough
uh crop left over to uh for, to give
it to the palace. Uh OR for the temples
for various services. You would have to pay the
temple priest for marriages, for uh for, for burials.
Uh And you had the division of labor, all
all settled by uh credit and the economy basically
still worked on it on a credit uh economy
uh with these mutual uh obligations and uh problematic
personal debts didn't really develop uh during until maybe
the third millennium. BC is where we begin to
have the first royal clean slates. Uh So suppose
that uh uh the economy worked on credit during
the crop year because there wasn't any grain to
pay because it wasn't harvested yet. And so if
uh uh people would go to the local bar
to the ale house, uh They would uh have
uh ale and they uh the proprietor uh woman
would mark it up on, on the slate just
like you go into a bar and you pay
on payday. Uh But the payday in the bronze
age was when the crop was in. And at
that point, the uh the cultivators would then uh
uh have bring their crop to uh the temples.
It would all be measured out on the threshing
floor and the uh they uh they would measure
out how much do you owe to the Ale
Woman? How much do you owe to the temple?
How much do you get to keep uh for
yourself? All of that. Uh The uh all of
that was a kind of uh working in kind
And money was only used really at harvest time
because that was the only time it appeared. Well,
all the way down to the medieval period, by
the 12th and 13th century in England, for instance,
uh that operated the same way. Uh THE uh
serfs or uh uh cultivators uh would operate on
credit during the crop year, money would finally come
in uh when they would grow the crop, uh
They would, they would sell it, they would use
the money to pay uh whoever they owed money
to. And uh essentially that would clear the slate
for again. But what happened if the crops failed?
Uh There could be a drought, there could be
a flood or there could be military uh operations.
And so when that happened, uh the uh uh
palace said, well, uh we can't have uh the
uh the cultivators unable to pay the debts because
if you couldn't pay the debt to someone, you
owed it to, you had to work it off
in labor and in fact, one of the few,
the, the first way of getting labor for hire
was uh to lend money to someone and say,
well, you can work it off. We want your
labor powers. Uh And uh if the uh ruler,
uh the king did not say, all right, there
is a, a flood, a drought you don't have
to pay. Uh IN, in Hammurabi's laws. It says
uh if the storm God aed floods, the land,
the debt don't get paid because otherwise you'd have
everybody all of a sudden, you'd have the cultivators
falling into bondage to uh their creditors. And some
people in any case had to borrow money even
beyond what they could pay, even in normal. Uh
uh TIMES they could get sick. Uh uh THEY
could need a special help. There could be all
sorts of problems and you had uh to work
off uh the debt, uh often in the form
of bondage. Uh You wouldn't necessarily have to live
at the predator's house. Uh But the uh often
the borrower, the head of the uh man at
the head of the family would say, well, take
my slave girl, for instance, I'll pledge my slave
girl uh to you uh as collateral to get
back or e even uh their wife or their
daughter. Uh And so, uh uh the economy got,
tended to get out of balance in time and
rumors would come in and uh around 2500 BC
just uh start. Ok. Uh We're going to start
a clean slate. Uh We're, we're going to wipe
out the problematic uh debt so that everybody can
basically uh be in balance and we can keep
restoring a kind of idealized status quo, ante uh
the, the way the world uh was before it
got out of kilter. And uh that, that was
the who the whole idea, there was a kind
of idea of a norm. And fortunately, there was
no Milton Friedman or uh Chicago school people to
say, well, everything's going to work out automatically. Uh
They uh the bronze age rulers were much smarter
than uh the modern economists. They knew that economies
tended to polarize and the main cause of polarization
was debt and the way to get rid of
it was simply to cancel the deaths and uh
uh put everybody on an equal footing once again.
But when exactly did rulers decide that perhaps it
was a good time for a depth consolation.
Oh, there were two occasions when any new ruler
took the throne. Uh He said, well, I'm gonna
start my throne uh with, I'm gonna be a
good ruler. I'm gonna start the throne with everything
in balance. We're gonna cancel the depth and begin
my rule in balance and hopefully we're gonna keep
things that way. So a new ruler would uh
be crowned and uh usually it was told on
his second year uh uh of the year names
for the rulers, they'd say uh he proclaims justice.
Uh And this, there would be at some point
after the coronation. Uh And we don't know exactly
when it could have been harvest time. Uh THAT
uh the ruler would do that or uh it
would be at harvest time or there would be
a military conquest. And for, for instance, when Hammurabi
uh conquered uh some of the neighboring regions, uh
he uh proclaimed a debt cancellation for the region.
Uh uh Number one by liberating all of the
debt bond persons. He got the support of all
of the uh the people in these regions. And
uh also uh that was sort of like uh
just like uh uh I hammer Ravi uh canceled
all the debts when I took the throne. Uh
I'm doing it for you because you're part of
my uh my region. And this is the beginning
of my reign over you people in Larsa uh
or uh whoever else uh they, they were there.
But just to clarify this point, what were the
kinds of debts that were canceled? Exactly? Were it,
was it only personal debts or also
commercial debts? Uh O only the only personal debts?
Uh uh The uh the other form of debt
of course, was trade debt. And uh that developed
consumer because uh uh Mesopotamia had very rich land
that was deposited over millions of years by sediment
uh by the uh rivers overflowing and uh giving
it very rich land. Uh But it didn't have
stone or metal. And uh so similar, the Sumerians
had to trade for their raw materials. And what
they did was they exchange uh the uh palace,
the temples or even uh private uh landowners. Uh
We don't know too much but uh about how
they develop, but they would consign textiles or handicrafts
to, to merchants. And uh they uh said, well,
the idea is we want to share, uh you
know, you uh we're gonna give you the uh
consignment of the textile. Uh WE want have, have
you get half the profits, we get half the
profits. But at that time, uh nobody expected the
merchants to actually keep record books of uh how,
how much they traded and what they got back.
So the deal was uh you're going to have
to pay us. Uh uh We give you one,
Mina, you'll have to pay us back in uh
two minas of silver, uh 100%. Uh YOU know,
the, the debt will double in five years. That
was the normal uh uh uh commercial loan. And
uh the, the merchant uh would uh have uh
basically, obviously they made a very large uh trade
because uh five years doubling time works out to
uh 20% per year in normal interest. Uh And
uh it's possible that uh merchants would run into
debt to each other. They, they were all part
of a community in any local city where they
developed up as you got, went into N A,
uh, or into Iran or, uh, uh, uh, elsewhere,
there'd be, uh, local groups and it's possible that,
uh, merchants couldn't pay the debts to other merchants,
but no matter what, they would still always have
their own self-support lands, uh, if, uh, worse came
to worse, uh, because the citizens, they all had
the self-support lands. And so, uh, they, they were
protected by the fact that everybody gets as a
human, right? The basic means of self support. Uh
And uh, so the commercial debts were not canceled.
Uh, THAT was uh left. Uh, TH those debts
were denominated in silver. So when the Babylonian rulers,
uh Hamar Rabi's dynasty and other people in the
early second millennium, it was around 1750 BC would
uh uh cancel the debts. They would always specify
that these were the, uh barley debts that were
canceled, not the silver debts that were left in
place. Uh, JUST like, uh, uh, today, uh, uh,
the, the problematic debts that everybody wants to be
canceled are the student loan debts and the uh,
uh, the bankrupt, uh, personal bankruptcy, uh for people
who couldn't pay, but uh, uh, they're not really
canceling uh business debts if there's a bankruptcy, uh,
you lose, you lose the property
since you mentioned interest and interest rates there. How
was interest bearing debt invented?
Well, originally, as I said, it was part of
the profit sharing agreement uh in uh in uh
foreign trade uh for silver debts. Uh THE pro
and it took a long time for me to
figure out how you got the interest. How did
this spread to the agricultural sector? Well, the palace
had agreements with uh the uh the community that
they palace had its own land and the temples
had their own lands and they would lend these
uh uh lend these lands, the sharecroppers in exchange
for one third of the crop. And so somehow
they said, all right. Well, just as, uh, we
get one third of the return for land if
we give you money, uh, the interest rate for
barley debts is 30 is one third of the
principal. Uh, SOMETIMES, uh, the predator would charge one
third if, even if it wasn't an entire year.
Uh, uh, WE found, uh in the records that
it was supposed to be one third and, uh,
in Hammurabi's laws, he specifies silver debts have to
pay 20 20% per year, but he didn't say
20% because they didn't use, uh, the, uh, the
decimal system. They used the sex adjustment system that
is based on sixties just as you have 60
seconds in a minute. In a minute. You had
60 shuttles in um, um, a, a silver Mina
and you one shekle, uh, per mina per month
works out to 12 shekel. Uh, A year. That's
the 12/60 that's 20%. Uh Well, that became the
uh the standard. And the, the uh they expressed
this in a kind of poetic meta metaphor. They
said the Mina gives birth to a shekel and
it gave birth to it on the new moon.
Uh And every uh new mo every month, there
would be another uh shekle born to this Mina
of uh debt or proportionally uh whatever there was.
So money was uh the payment of interest, the
thought of uh uh uh reproducing itself just like
an animal. Well, uh by the time that Aristotle
tried to figure out uh uh how money and
interest came into being uh the fact that they
uh the sumerians called uh interest mush, which is
the word for a young goat because they said,
well, for the metaphor, uh just as a uh
uh Mina gives birth to a shuffle. It sort
of like a goat giving birth. That was their
image for giving birth. Uh Because uh obviously silver
doesn't uh reproduce uh as Aristotle noticed. So, uh
you would, you would have the uh uh the
meaning of giving birth birth as mu well, by
the time uh the uh idea of interest was
uh brought uh to the West and the uh
uh eighth century B say the uh interest was
called Cocos, which was uh uh a young uh
cattle in uh uh in uh Greek or Fus
uh as infertile uh for uh, which is the
word for cattle in, uh, in Rome. Uh, AND,
uh, they had the same idea that you had
in Suer of giving birth. Well, but they didn't
use the 60 base system. Uh, uh, uh, Greece,
uh, used the Egyptian decimal system. So the, uh,
rate of interest was decimal, either it was 10%
a year or it was 1% per month. And
in Rome it was 1/12. Rome used the Du
Duo deciple system. Uh, BASED on 12th, there were
12 troy ounces in a pound. Uh And so
the pound gave birth to an ounce once a
year. So you had the same metaphor of giving
birth, but they use the word for animal. And,
uh, Aristotle said, oh, this doesn't make any sense
at all because silver is a barren metal. It
doesn't really give birth. He didn't, uh, he didn't
realize how metaphoric, uh the uh idea is. And
of course, when you have economists try to write
ancient history, uh, they're the one, the one group
that should not write, uh about ancient history because
they think how, what, how would we, uh organize
a Sumerian Bron age economy if we went back
in a time machine, they'd think? Oh, well, I
guess, uh, the original form of interest was people
would lend cows. Uh, AND, uh, they, they get
the cows as interest and, uh, uh, anthropologists have
found no uh society anywhere in the world. Uh
WHERE cows are lent out, uh cows are pledged
as collateral and they're lost to creditors. Uh But
they're not, uh most loans are not uh not
very productive.
So, uh you've already got a little bit into
how interest bearing debt was brought to Greece. We're
also going to talk a little bit about Rome,
which is also something that you explore in your
book, The Collapse of Antiquity. But just before we
get into the examples of Greece and Rome and
what happened there? Um, LET me just ask you
perhaps a more general question. Uh, WHAT are the
consequences economically? But I guess we can also say
socially and politically, if the debts get too high
and they are not canceled.
Well, if debts got, uh, uh, too high, uh,
then, uh, the creditors would get too rich and
the problem, uh, if debts got too high, you
would have much of the labor falling into bondage
to the creditors. Well, the creditors wanted their labor.
So the labor, if you were in bondage to
a creditor, you'd have to spend your time cultivating
his land, not your own land. And if you
had to do that, then number one, you wouldn't
be able to work, uh, at Corvey Labor, uh
at, uh, but because you'd be, uh, working for
the private, uh, uh predator, uh, or you wouldn't
be able to serve in the army because you
were a bond person. Uh, AND, and couldn't serve
and so the, the, the, the uh there was
something even worse that as you have a creditor
class get wealthy, it became a power in itself
to rival the palace. And uh if you have
the creditor class wanting to rival the palace and
even overthrow the rulers, uh well, the first thing
they would do would be to stop debt cancellation.
That's what happened in antiquity, but it didn't happen
in um uh in the near east because the
near east was able to prevent, to prevent an
independent uh creditor oligarchy from developing. We do find
uh cases of uh some fam creditors who got
very rich, got a lot of land uh from
uh uh that they had foreclosed on from their
creditors. But then uh a generation or two labor,
we don't find them at all. Somehow they were
treated like uh China would treat uh billionaires who
have a little too much money. Uh Somehow uh
uh the lands were all returned to their original
uh owners and this was uh uh we uh
uh this was spelled out in Hammurabi's debt cancellations
and those of his uh grandsons and great grandsons
and the uh the debt cancellations are part of
a broader restoration of order in addition to freeing
the bond servants and saying now you don't owe
any more money, you can go back to your
land. Uh AND your slave girls will be returned
to you uh from the creditor, you would also
uh cancel. Uh YOU, you all uh cancel any
of the lands that they lost uh that you
would return the land to them as well as
giving them uh the freedom. So you had debt
cancellation. Uh uh GOING together with freeing the bond
servants and restoring the land. And the word that
Hammurabi used, the Babylonian word was under arm. Well,
this is the word that uh in the Babylonian
captivity. Uh WHEN the Jews were uh relocated to
uh Babylon after they lost the war, they uh
became familiar with all of these mesopotamian practices and
brought them back uh to Judea and the Hebrew
word uh for uh that was used in Leviticus
25. The uh the jubilee was du and D
is the exact cognate to Andar.
Yes, we're also going to get a little bit
into the Bible later in our conversation. But uh
could we say then that there was historically a
relationship between debt and the development of wage labor?
Well, in the sense that uh the, the first
labor for hire was you'd make a loan to
the labor and he would have to uh repay
you by working off the loan. Uh And uh
that was basically uh how you get labor. Well,
pretty soon this idea of lending money and getting
repaid became abbreviated and uh well, we don't have
to go through the lending pro process. We'll just
pay you, uh you know, uh but uh, uh,
uh, pay you for this, uh, instead of you
having to work it off, uh, off a debt,
you know, we'll just, we'll just, uh, uh, uh,
instead of paying you in advance by giving you
a loan, we'll pay you, uh, for, uh, what
you're working on. So, it really was debt bondage.
That, uh, was the first form of, uh, labor
for hire and that, that evolved into it. So,
uh, getting more directly into your book, The Collapse
of Antiquity, you've already touched a little bit on
Greece there. But could you tell us how the
rise of creditor and land holding oligarchies happen in
classical Greece and Rome?
You mean uh how, how it happened there? All
right, Greece uh was uh the, the West were
the barbarians uh at this time, all of this
uh base, all of the uh basic elements of
uh e commerce and uh economic relationships were developed
in Mesopotamia and the other near eastern countries. Uh
THERE had been really bad weather around 1200 BC.
You had a depopulation uh of uh uh the
whole near eastern region all the way into the
Mediterranean and you had a population collapse. Uh For
instance, in, in Greece, you had the my Canaan
uh palace economies that used linear b uh the
palace economies fell apart. And uh the, the, the
local uh district managers uh who would manage a,
a local district on behalf of the palace ruler
once there was no more palace ruler, uh the
manager would become uh the local uh king. Uh
uh AND you could see this in, in the
language uh that they had or there were warlords
uh and mafia type uh of people. Well, any
rate by the eighth century BC. And we're talking
about 400 years after uh there was a drought
or uh something like uh a uh a drought
when this went all the way from India, all
the way to the Mediterranean. It looked like it
was a, a global phenomenon that just uh ended
uh whole cultures. Well, uh by, by the time
the Syrian and the Phoenician traders began to uh
get ships and begin to trade again. They moved
westward into Greece, into Italy and uh they uh
the people they would deal with you, you'd land
usually on an island right outside uh uh the
big city, sort of a neutral zone. And uh
you would, uh the people you talk to would
be the uh local chieftains. And uh you would
explain to them how the financial system worked and
said, all right, you know, we're going to trade
these goods for uh your goods and uh we
need to be paid uh in money and uh
we charge interest. So this idea of charging interest
was brought from the near east to uh Greece
and Italy. But Greece and Italy didn't have any
uh palace rulers. Uh They, because they all disappeared
in 1200 BC. Uh They, they all they had
was local chieftains and these were sort of ma
uh either warlord types, uh you know, just sort
of grabbers. So, uh uh they were the, the
people who grabbed power either because they just took,
kept the uh uh the local uh means of
production. Uh WHEN the Myan palaces fell apart or
uh they were warlords or they were just local
big men, uh ambitious sort of, you know, it
was a free for all sort of like Russia
after 1991. Uh And uh these are the people
that said, well, all right, this idea of lending
money is very good and they began to lend
money uh to uh other, their countrymen uh and
charge interest, but there was no ruler to cancel
the debts. And so you had uh pretty quickly
uh the powerful families taking over all of the
land in uh uh the Greek cities, uh Athens,
Sparta, Corinth. Uh And uh in the various uh
Italian cities uh uh uh whether it was uh
Rome or the Etruscan cities or others. And these
cities were not very uh pleasant, uh uh pleasant
places to live. And uh you had uh the
kind uh you, you had in the West, what
would have happened in Mesopotamia if they didn't cancel
the debts, you had a creditor oligarchy developing. Well,
uh there was a revolution almost everywhere. Finally, the
people rose up. I shouldn't say the people. Uh
THERE were uh most of these revolutions uh like
in Corinth. Uh IT'S, it's uh uh organ. It's
shown the best. Uh You had minor uh members
of the wealthy family saying this isn't fair. Well,
maybe they thought it wasn't fair that they didn't
get as much as the richer members of the
family, but they led the populist revolution, they overthrown
the mafia type uh dictators, by the way, uh
uh A lot of classical historians use the word
mafia mafiosi uh type uh uh leaders for what
was before the eighth century. It's not my term.
Uh I picked it up from Von W and
other people that have, that have used it. So
uh they would uh they would overthrow it and
uh they would uh do essentially what the Mesopotamian
rulers did. They say, OK, we've overthrown uh the
uh wealthy people that have kept you in debt.
We're canceling the debts and we're redistributing the land
so you can all have the land and we're
gonna be good rulers. We're going to develop uh
public infrastructure. Uh We're going to develop trade. Uh
We're going to develop uh commerce. Uh We're, we're
going to make you all rich. That's what happened
in Corin uh in uh Sparta. Uh There was
uh a similar uh fight and uh they said,
well, we're not only going to cancel debts, we're
gonna get rid of money itself, we're not going
to use silver. Uh We are going to use
a kind of uh iron. Uh But we just
to make sure that you don't think that money
is a commodity that you realize that money is
uh A P created by the public sector. Uh
We're going to dip the iron when we make
it in vinegar. Uh So that it's uh all
blistered and it's not, not practical. Uh And uh
so that they got rid of the uh actual
money. Although the uh the Spartan uh elites kept
the, kept their own property in Sparta itself. And
it was on the land outside of Sparta that
Sparta essentially uh conquered the neighboring uh uh uh
uh population and made them into hills, which is
a kind of serfdom where they had to work,
supplying food for uh the Spartan uh Khoo, the
equals uh uh Martin men. Well, uh finally, by
490 BC, you had uh the, the most backward
country in uh uh uh city state in Greece,
uh Athens finally had its own uh revolution. Uh
And they wanted to do in Athens what they'd
done in these other countries. And so uh uh
to prevent a revolution, they appointed uh solo as
uh so as the Arcon, meaning OK, you're going
to be the ruler, you'll settle things. Uh uh
Solo canceled uh the debts, mainly the mortgage debts
uh that held the people to the land. Uh
We're still not sure exactly what happened, but he
did cancel the debts, but he didn't redistribute the
land and uh that disappointed the population so much
that uh uh they sort of forced solo into
exile. And uh the, the real fight for democracy
was led by uh as it is today by
people who uh the creditors call uh dictators or
parents. Uh And that was uh uh uh uh
the followers through the balance of the uh six
sixth centuries uh who had uh bodyguards uh uh
and everything. Until finally, by the end of the
sixth century, uh you had another minor member of
one of the richest families in Greece, uh Kleist
who was an al uh family uh doing uh
what Stalin never really did and re reorganized uh
the voting system and really created the Athenian democracy.
You uh you had uh Stalin uh Solon gave
uh uh when he left the Pisistratus uh was
taken over, he was called a dictator because he
was a populist and supported uh democracy for the
people. He was uh starting a building, he was
uh putting the people to work and giving them
jobs. Uh And uh so of course, he was
denounced by, by the other people. Finally, uh you
have placed the needs that established a democracy. So
you, you had um but all the same you
never had in Greece or Rome uh a ruler
that would cancel the deaths for five centuries. You
had the populations Revo uh revolting in civil war.
They wanted to get back to uh uh uh
a ruler that uh was like the me, the
mesopotamian rulers like Hammurabi or the Sumerians, the others
have canceled the deaths. And, and Teko never had
that. And that's what made western civilization different from
uh uh the uh the Middle Eastern civilization. They
didn't have a central ruler ruler. The uh so-called
democracy wanted uh a central uh uh the debts
to be canceled, they wanted the land to be
redistributed. Uh And so, uh Aristotle, when he wrote
a study of the Greek constitutions said, well, uh
all the constitutions call themselves democratic, but they're really
oligarchy. Uh BECAUSE under a democracy, you're going to
have wealthy people developing and they uh uh become
an oligarchy and then they make themselves hereditary into
an aristocracy. And finally, some member of the aristocracy,
fights with other members of the aristocracy and takes
the people into their camp. In other words, becomes
a populist and said, hey, I want your support
in overthrowing this aristocracy and the whole thing starts
all over again.
So, uh I mean, of course, the question I'm
about to ask you is probably something that you
would be exploring more in your referred book of
this trilogy. But this is uh a historical legacy
that we in the West got from Greece and
Italy, specifically Roman uh was still alive. I mean,
centuries later, right?
You're saying what is the legacy that we have?
Uh The
there is this historical legacy of uh not having
uh that consolation when it's necessary that
we will legacy with the dark age. You could
say the legacy was uh the oligarchy took over
Rome ended up uh conquering Greece and uh all
the other areas. Uh And it was the most
uh vicious oligarchy. Rome began uh uh uh essentially
as a city of refuge, uh meaning runaways. Uh
And in uh one of one of the reasons
I should have said that the Babylonian rule is
canceled, the debs is if they wouldn't have canceled
the debts and the bond uh persons, the, the
bond servants would have simply run away. Uh And
there was a labor shortage. Uh All the, in
archaic times, everybody really wanted to get labor. That
was the golden time to be a laborer because
everybody wanted you to be their part of their
community. Well, uh what Rome uh said was uh
well, we're here, we are um on the Tiber
River. There are a lot of mosquitoes here. Nobody
really wants to live here. It's uh uh there's
a uh uh uh water is good for trade
but not good. Uh You don't want mosquitoes uh
around. So, how are we going to get people
here? Well, the kings of uh of uh Rome
said, all right, uh fugitives if you come here.
Uh And uh you're not able to get uh
much land for yourself or an alternative to bondage.
And uh these other nasty Italian uh uh mafia
uh communities that there are come on to here,
we'll give you land, we'll, we'll treat you fairly.
And so uh Rome became uh a magnet uh
for people uh to grow rapidly and uh the
kings took over. Uh BUT also you had, by
the late uh uh sixth century, uh uh the
late uh five hundreds, you had even Aristocrats uh
in other Italian cities fighting with each other. And
uh mo uh moving to Rome and uh they
merged with other aristocrats and they overthrew the kings.
And when they overthrew the kings, they stopped the
ability of kings to treat the uh population uh
fairly. And uh they introduced the class war and
immediately clamped down on the population. And uh we're
not gonna, uh you know, if you fall into
debt, uh you're going to be our debt servants
forever. There's no reversibility of debt. If there was,
there's no circular time, there's linear time. Uh You
lose the land, that's it. You're not gonna get
it back. Well, in the 490 the uh uh
citizens of Rome, there was a walkout. It's called
the Secession of the Plebs in 490. And uh
they decided to walk out and said, well, you
know, we're not going to be a part of
your community. Uh It, it was a nice all
uh well, it lasted. But uh we're gonna go
somewhere else. So there was a lot of negotiation
and then they realized, well, where are we going
to go? Because all the other cities around us
are pretty rotten oligarchies too. So they came back
with the oligarchy making promise. But an a, an
ancient oligarchy making a promise to the people is
sort of like the United States making a promise
to uh other countries internationally. You know, they immediately
broke uh uh all of their words and there
was another uh walkout in uh about 450 BC
and they said, look, uh we've got it right.
We're not gonna trust you again. Uh What you
promise us, write it all down. So they wrote
the law of the 12 tables and that's where
they established. Here's the interest rate that you have
to pay here are the terms. Uh uh THEY
at least wrote everything down. Uh And what they
wrote was a pretty oligarchic uh set of laws.
Well, uh this uh tradition of a creditor oriented
laws, all debts must be paid. There's not going
to be any debt forgiveness. Uh Once you lose
land or sell it, you're never going to get
it back. Linear time. All this whole Roman spirit
of the law is oligarchies uh can control society.
Uh OR uh there's no, not ever going to
be a democracy under our rule. That is what
uh uh polarized, more and more every century there
were revolts against uh the oligarchy and they all
failed because the oligarchy was uh uh controlled uh
the uh the heavily armed uh military and uh
essentially political assassination again already in uh uh Rome
uh from the same policy that the United States
does. If there's somebody who's uh uh advocating uh
uh fair, fair parade for uh for the people,
you know, fair deal, you assassinate him. And uh
the Roman history is marked with political assassination just
like the United States does in uh throughout Latin
America and other countries. And, or uh what, what
it uh uh Israel is just done uh uh
against the Iranian uh uh Iranian fin uh uh
consulate in uh in Syria. So uh political assassination
and finally, there was uh in the first century
BC, there was outright war uh in uh uh
uh the uh Cataline uh wa was a uh
one of the Aristocrats. Almost all the, the revolutions
were led by Aristocrats. Uh NOT some uh but
they would mobilize the people. Uh And uh they
would uh get together uh and essentially take the
people in, into their camp as a populist and
try to fight, they were utterly destroyed. Uh And
finally, uh one of the early supporters of Cataline
Julius Caesar uh organized an army uh uh marched
on Rome uh became uh uh the leader and
we all know what happened to him. He was
uh uh uh that he was killed, uh, uh,
in the Senate. And, uh, the result is that
Rome got, uh, uh, essentially was, ended up the
Roman Empire in a series of large, uh, manners
held by the, on the land held by the
wealthiest families. And, uh, the, uh, trade dried up
the population shrunk. And, uh, uh, you ended up
with a dark age, uh, which is what happens
when you don't cancel the debts. You don't redistribute
the land and you, uh you po uh when
a society polarizes and uh sucks all the income
and control over labor to a narrow elite at
the top of the pyramid, a creditor, landowning oligarchy,
the results always going to be a dark age
because uh you've killed the internal market, you've killed
uh all uh forms of economic growth.
So all of these factors, political, social, economic that
derived from this sort of progra ideology contributed ultimately
also to the fall of the Roman Empire.
Correct? Yes. Yes. Uh That's what oligarchies do by
the. So I just like, uh in the United
States and Europe today, uh, you have uh financial
oligarchy emerging and the result is deindustrialization because if
you impoverish the economy, you're not going to have
industry anymore. Uh YOU'RE going to have uh basically
self sufficient uh uh enclaves of uh uh a
few families, uh run everything. And uh basically the
problem with the financial sector with predators throughout history
is live in the short run. Uh THEY don't
care that they're bringing a dark age. All they
care about is right now, uh, just like corporate
managers just care. Well, you know, what are the
earnings going to be in the next quarter? What
are the years earnings going to be, uh, on
which my bonuses are based? And so they lead
the corporation instead of using uh, the corporate profits
to, uh, make new factories and new, new machinery,
more labor and uh production. They say, well, we're
not going to reinvest profits. We're not going to
put money into research and development because we're going
to be leaving the company by then. Let's just
use all the profits to pay dividends to push
up the stock price. And let's use the profits
for stock buybacks and uh we'll make the stock
go up and our uh bonuses are based on
what we do uh with the stock. So uh
essentially the financial sector uh today is uh really
doing just what uh the financial sector did in
Roman Times. They ended up uh lending money to
uh other parts of the richest part of the
uh uh neighboring uh geographic area, which is Asia
minor. Uh They essentially took over uh the, they
looted the temples, they looted the palace uh of
uh all the money. They, they uh uh they
were, they didn't what Margaret Thatcher would have done.
They privatized all of the public uh uh utilities
and uh essentially impoverished the population and uh uh
uh what they did to Asian miner. Uh THERE
was a revolution there by Mithridates uh that, that
uh ended up uh uh on one occasion killing
80,000 Romans who had gone uh throughout the near
east as public and uh tax collectors or creditors
or just advent uh financial ventures and merchants uh
uh Rome retaliated. Uh NOT only against Asian Miner,
but it destroyed Athens totally uh wiped it out,
uh destroyed Sparta uh almost uh totally. Uh AND
uh uh uh tried to lay waste uh uh
to the whole world. They, they did to, to
the rest of Greece. Uh WHAT the United States
has done to Latin America, Libya and much of
the near east, you could say they were the
first Americans in terms of foreign policy.
So let me just ask you a little bit
about Christianity here because of course, we in the
in the West also have uh the Christian legacy.
But curiously enough, it seems that at least early
Christianity and also according to some Eero and biblical
scholars, uh was more preoccupied with uh things like
that, forgiveness than uh sin, for example. So, could
you, could you tell us about that? How early
Christians uh I mean, what were the main worries
of early Christians, let's say,
well, the, the early Christians were Jewish uh and
uh uh Jesus uh uh was uh uh Jewish
and within Israel uh there had been a, a
whole fight Israel had. Yeah, it, it, it looks
like from the Jewish Bible that uh the Jewish
religion, uh and the Jewish Bible was uh the
product of what really was a civil war because
by the first century, uh the kings uh throughout
the whole uh uh but especially uh in Israel
uh were not the kind of the kings of
Hammurabi were uh Assyria. Assyrian kings canceled the debts.
Babylonian kings canceled the debts, but uh not uh
uh uh the uh Judea uh and Israel were
uh on way on the western periphery of all
this. And so, uh uh uh the Jewish Bible
is sort of unique. And instead of saying here,
uh the wonderful things that the kings did, uh
most of the kings are pretty bad. Uh And
as a result, uh Israel broke away from uh
uh Judea and said, uh you know, we don't
have any uh uh you, you're not really for
us, you're trying to just exploit us. What uh
what do we have in the sons of Jesse
uh meaning uh uh thing. Uh And uh you
had uh the prophets uh uh Isaiah uh Mika,
uh all, all of the other prophets uh denouncing
uh the wealthy who would put uh uh plot
to plot and house to house together in big
estate until there was no room for people in
the land. Uh Well, uh the result of that
was that when the uh when the Jew lost
the war to Babylonia, uh the wealthiest families and
uh some uh uh most powerful uh families were
exiled uh to Babylonia. Well, in Babylonia, uh we
have uh the cuneiform records. Uh Cornelia Wunsch has
been uh translating all of these uh records and
has just published a whole book uh on uh
the Jewish life there. And you could see that
most of the Jews pretty uh acclimatized. Uh They
uh they uh uh adopted the uh they assimilated
and uh adopted the Babylonian rules. And uh finally,
uh you had uh the Persian Empire under Cyrus
uh uh conquering Babylonia and throughout the ancient world
all the way down through the European middle ages
when uh uh one and imperial country would conquer
another, they left, they didn't just kill all of
the leaders of the country uh uh that they
canceled only the Christians did that. Uh uh uh
uh BEFORE there was Christianity, you would leave the
local administrators in place. And so uh uh the
uh the Persians uh left the Babylonian administrators in
place and uh and uh the uh permitted uh
religious uh freedom, there was no attempt to say,
you have to believe what we believe. That's uh
Catholicism. Uh BUT that didn't exist in the ancient
world. So, uh you had the Jews saying, well,
you know, we'd like to go back to uh
Israel. So uh around the sixth century, uh they
uh you had uh the return, Ezra and Nehemiah
uh uh uh uh in uh Nehemiah uh who
became sort of the local uh he was uh
of the local leader. Uh He, he, he, he,
his autobiography is one of the chapters in uh
the Jewish Bible. No sign of debt cancellation there.
But Ezra sort of uh uh led the whole
group of stri scribes that was saying now let's
really put the whole, let's uh tie everything together
in the whole Bible. It was there that they
took the Babylonian under our own debt cancellation and,
and uh translated it to roar and made it
uh put it right in the center of Mosaic
Law in Leviticus 25. As if this is the
command of Moses in the very beginning, you've got
to cancel the debts uh every fif 50 years.
And because the kings uh at that time, uh
uh you know, the middle of the first millennium
BC were no longer the near eastern type things.
Uh They, they took the idea of debt cancellation
out of the hand of rulers and put it
in the hands of the religious uh plan, the
religious leaders. Uh And that's why they said uh
they uh they said uh the uh religious power
has power over the secular rulers uh because the
secular rulers are out for themselves. And we as
the religious group uh are trying to uh preserve
the fact that yes, there was a social war
uh in the Jewish lands. And uh we uh
we uh insist on having uh li uh preventing
our population from falling into debt bondage and losing
its land. Well, uh because uh most of the
uh Jewish uh records were not, uh kept on
play. Uh AND uh their perish, we really don't
know very much about what happened from the uh
fifth century BC down to uh Jesus's time. But
uh in terms of the uh financial relationships and
the everyday debt relationship. But uh we know when
uh Jesus uh came to give his first sermon,
uh uh when he went back uh uh to
his uh home uh hometown, he uh opened uh
the scroll of Isaiah uh talking about uh uh
the jubilee year and said I have come to
proclaim the J the jubilee year. He was fighting
against uh the rabbi school. The wealthy Jews had,
uh sort of uh done uh what almost all
happens to religion, the wealthiest classes take over religion.
And uh the rabbinical school, especially Hillel uh had
uh uh tried to reject the jubilee and he'd
introduced something called the pro school. In other words,
when you would, uh the debtor would sign an
IOU he would sign something. I waive my rights
under the uh jubilee rate, uh so that you
can't do it well, uh similar uh uh way
back in 1750 BC and the uh in the,
in the 1650 BC. Uh, THE creditors had tried
to have that same clause in the cuneiform documents,
uh, especially under, uh, Hammurabi's great grandson. Um, uh,
I, uh, great Bronson. Uh I can't pronounce the
name of it. Uh, BUT, and we have the,
uh, legal record and, uh, the court said this
is illegal, you're not allowed to have to waive
your rights. Well, in, uh, Judea, uh, they were
Judah, they were allowed to, uh, the rabbi said,
uh yes, uh you can waive your rights. Jesus
is fighting against them. And so, uh in uh
uh the uh book of Luke, uh Luke describes,
uh Jesus giving his speech and said, he was
immediately attacked by uh the Pharisees uh who loved
money. Uh Meaning that they were the wealthy class
and they, they, there was a whole uh war
and uh that was why uh the wealthy class
of uh uh of uh Judah, uh I insisted,
uh that the Romans uh uh kill, kill Jesus
because he was uh getting the whole people back
trying to uh retain the whole spirit of Judaism
that was in most the law. Uh And so,
uh uh uh he, one of the speeches that's
uh in uh the Jewish Bible is the, the
sermon on the mount. And that's where, uh one
of the lines is what uh uh became the
Lord's prayer, forgive us our debts just as we
forget, forgive the debtors. Well, you can imagine how
this, uh, uh, once, uh, Christianity, uh, Constantine, uh,
large, uh, the Roman women especially, uh, became Christians,
they converted the husbands, uh, Constantine made, uh, uh,
Christianity, the, uh, Roman religion. And, but the Roman,
uh, religion again, who, who, uh, administers a religion,
the wealthiest classes, uh, uh, and, uh, the, the,
the one, the first thing they had to do
was let's kill all the Jews, uh, because, uh,
we don't want anyone to have any reference uh
uh uh to what early Christianity was. So, in
Cyril of Alexandria, uh uh one of the authors
of the, the concept of the Trinity uh organized
whole teams to go throughout Alexandria, uh which was
about one third of the population of Jewish, uh
just trying to kill them. But Trinity was formed
as an anti Semitic religion. Uh And because most
of the early Christians were Jewish. Uh And so,
uh you had under the form of the Trinity
immediate, you had, well, what is Jesus? Well, you
couldn't really have Jesus as an individual person who
was leading the uh the fight for uh canceling
the deaths. And we, we know from the, uh
when the Romans came in to uh were threatening
uh uh Judea, the uh uh uh the librarians
uh in uh took uh all of the sacred
books of Judaism uh from Jerusalem and they, they
put them in uh uh in jars and these
were the dead sea thrills and we know from
the Dead Sea thrills that there was a whole
group of people, uh a widespread advocacy of debt
cancellation, especially around followers of uh Melda. Uh I
give all of the quotations of these documents uh
in the book. Well, uh the idea was you
had to get rid of the uh the, the
whole idea that Jesus was a human being and
part of a social war because we don't want
any history of that social war. Uh So Jesus
really wasn't a human being. He was part of
God, his body was part of God. Uh Nothing
about Jewish Thera because God is God and God
is a Christian God. Uh WHO uh Jesus uh
said Saint Peter. Uh I, I give uh this,
uh I uh I le I leave uh the
administration of the church to Saint Peter. Uh THAT
turned out to be a, a forgery that so
called donation of Constantine where the Pope said, well,
uh we're the, the heirs of uh uh of
Jesus. Well, in addition to uh uh Cyril of
Alexandria, you have probably the most evil uh uh
uh of the early Christians who really de uh
uh uh pushed it on a detour, Saint Augustine
uh there. Uh He was in North Africa and
uh North Africans uh had, uh the Romans had
been fighting a war against uh the North African
uh Christians and said, you have to give us
your sacred books to destroy them, uh, most of
the people didn't, uh, uh, a few people did,
uh, Augustine, uh, became sort of the, uh, uh,
the pet, uh, uh, client, uh, of Rome. And,
uh, he, uh, called the Roman troops in, uh,
you've got to kill all the Christians, uh, all
of the original Christians. The ones who wouldn't give
you their books, the ones who really wanted the
early Christianity, uh, don't, don't let them have any
of the churches, give us, uh give my group,
their churches. Uh And uh he uh one of
the great scholars of this period. Uh Brown uh
has uh written was called uh Constantine uh uh
Saint Augustine. Uh THE f really the, the first
founder of the spirit of the inquisition. Uh And
uh uh uh Augustine had a problem. What are
we going to do with the world? With the
Lord's prayer? We can't have forgive them their debts
because the, that the Roman society is all based
upon predators. So, uh I didn't say, well, he
really didn't say that what he said was forgive
them their sins. Well, the word for debt and
sin uh were the same in almost every language
uh in German, uh for instance, devoir uh in
French and even in, in Babylon. And you remember
at the beginning of our talk, I talked about
veld fines. Uh YOU would uh if you injured
somebody, you had to pay a fine. Uh And
that was told that uh the SD uh the
debt uh the Schult meant, ok, I've done an
offense. They uh they didn't really call it sin
in the Christian sense. It, it was an offense
and this money that I'm paying you is to
uh heal the offense to sort of cancel it
out. So the payment uh in the sin, they
use the same word for it. Uh We know
from the Greek translation of the Bible that indeed
uh Jesus is talking about canceling the Debs and
we know from all the other uh Jewish documentation
in the Dead Sea girls that uh they were
canceling uh the Debs. Uh But Augustine said no
uh there, it's really sin and sin is inborn
uh from we're all sinners because we've inherited it
from Adam. He, he rewrote all of Christianity as
they were all sin, sinful. Uh And you can
only get over it by giving your money to
the church. Uh And this ended up with uh
uh the, the sale of indulgences which finally led
to uh Martin Luther to break away after 1515
in Europe. Uh But the idea that uh he
said uh we in Rome, we're the pathway to
heaven. We decide who goes to heaven. It's gonna
cost you money. Uh And if you give it
to, to us uh and then uh then it's,
it's OK. We can heal because we are the
heirs of Christ and Christ is all about money.
Uh, AND, and, uh, you're all about sin. Well,
there was a little bit of a fight within
the, uh, uh, uh, the Christian church and, uh,
you had, uh, either a Welsh or, uh, uh,
other, uh, British, uh, uh, theologian saying, wait a
minute if you do good works, uh, uh, you
can, uh, be a moral person and go to
heaven. You don't have to say you're still, uh,
a sinner no matter what, you don't have to
give the money to the church. You can give
it to the community. You can build it up
with good works. No, no, have to be to
the church. I gotta get it. Uh I mean,
this was a totally evil person. And if you
read his autobiography, it's all about sexual sin and
uh obsession with uh with a sin of a
sexual form. It's just uh uh it, it, it
got perverted. Uh Fortunately, there was the real Christianity
uh such as uh such as survived. And that
was in Constantinople and there were five patriarchates of
the Christian church. Constantinople was the main one. There
was Alexandria. Uh And there was Antioch uh also
uh so uh not that Nole Jerusalem Antioch. Uh
And why am I blocking out uh Alex? And
I'm, I'm just blocking out the uh the other
one. And uh but Rome was uh the least
uh important Roman sort of got depopulated. And uh
by the 10th century 11th century. You had the
local Roman families. Uh, BASICALLY the, uh, the local
families all throughout, uh, the West would control, uh,
the, the local mayor, the local police force. They'd
also, uh, appoint members of the church and the,
uh, the leading family. Uh, uh, THERE was AAA
suburb of Rome Tusculum. And, uh, you had the,
uh, uh, the, uh, Tusculum Popes, uh, for, uh,
uh, ruling throughout almost the entire 10th century. And
uh the Catholic church itself calls this the pornography,
the rule of the uh the harlots. Um And
uh you know, a completely decadent flat. So anyway,
that's what, that's what uh the result of uh
uh all of this was. And the West fellow
fell into kind of uh uh just uh a,
a backwater. Uh And uh you had in the
uh again, constantinople, uh you had uh debt problems
sometimes developing, especially if there was a very bad
winter. Uh And the crops failed. The uh the
emperor would uh try to cancel the debts and
the emperor did everything it could to do what
the Babylonian rulers did to prevent a domestic oligarchy
from developing. Because if it did uh the, the,
the wealthy families of the Byzantine Empire, uh tried
to get uh get labor uh get their own
armies and they tried to uh attack uh uh
the emperor in constantinople to take it over saying
uh we, we, we want to run the empire,
not having an empire. We want to do what
the Romans did have the wealthy families take over.
They were defeated and uh uh in uh forgiven
their deaths. I, I sort of, uh, I have
the last chapter on constantinople. And uh finally, uh
the uh uh the emperor defeated the general. Uh
I invited him to a, a dinner then said,
you know, you don't have peace. And the emperor
asked the general, you know, how can we uh
prevent this kind of uh oligarchy uh taking over?
Uh uh YOU know, fighting men, keep trying to
take uh get the population in debt and fight
me. And the general said, well, you may be
surprised to hear a general say this, but you,
you've got to prevent the oligarchy from getting rich.
Uh You've got to keep them in check, uh
tax them. Uh MA make sure they don't have
enough money to uh to do uh what they've
just done uh again. And uh that's uh exactly.
Uh BUT uh one of the tyrants na namely
the, the, the good guys in uh the eight,
seventh and sixth century BC in Greece, uh had
said uh uh to uh one of the rulers,
uh he took the ruler to uh the ruler
said to him. Uh YOU know, what, what should
I do to prevent uh uh another group of
these mafiosi uh oligarchs taking and uh the uh
the philosopher uh trusted uh uh took a side
and uh, uh, cut all of the grain so
that it was all sort of equal and, uh
in other words, make them equal. You don't want
the tall green to end up dominating the others.
Well, uh, that was the spirit of Christian of
the real Christianity in Eastern Christianity. Uh, AND, uh,
as it turned, the, the 11th to 13th century,
saw Rome try to conquer, uh, uh, uh Eastern
Christianity and, uh, all in the middle of the
11th century, uh they, you had the great schism
of uh the West saying we reject everything that
uh uh is uh eastern because that was Christian.
Uh We've got to have our own religion. They
also called it Christianity. Uh And uh then you
had the crusades essentially that were fought mainly against,
almost entirely against other Christian countries. So I, I
guess I gave you a long uh dynamic.
No, no, but that was all very interesting to,
to learn. So, uh for the last part of
our conversation today, I would like to ask you
more about our contemporary societies. I mean, referring to
the collapse of antiquity again, uh what can we
learn from how things played out in ancient Greece
and Rome that would apply to our uh current
uh context.
Well, the Greeks uh uh had uh a much
more sophisticated uh economics than you had today. Uh
NOT as sophisticated as the Babylonians. The Babylonians actually
had a great economic model that's far in advance
of any mathematical model uh that they use today.
Their model was quite simple. They had uh on
the one hand, the exponential growth of debt doubling,
every kind of debt is a doubling time and
it grows exponentially, we have the textbooks that they
taught the uh uh the students. So we know
exactly what they were taught. They, they also, we
have the uh calculations for how much does a
herd, uh a herd grow. It's an s curve,
it, it uh tapers off. Uh And so if
you have an S curve tapering off and the
debts going up like this, you have the debts,
it exceeding the ability to pay by a widening
amount. And either you cancel the debts or else
you stifle the economy and debt deflation. Uh You
should have a model for that today. That's just
what's happening today. But uh today you have uh
since the creditors uh run the economics department, they
say everything's equilibrium. Don't worry everything's going to automatically
balance uh in the, the free market uh market
without government. You don't need government. Well, any anyway,
the, the Greeks, uh the the Greeks uh uh
said the big problem in society was money lust.
Once you uh that uh having wealth is not
like having bananas. Uh uh When I took uh
uh an econo economics phd, we were told that
diminishing marginal utility and uh the first banana you
like each added banana gets less and less until
finally you don't want any more. Uh, AND you're
satiated and so you're going to leave the crop
free for other people that don't have bananas and
they're want bananas more. Uh, AND, uh, you're gonna
be satiated and everything and that way everybody's going
to end up with their chance to get rich.
Well, the Greek said it doesn't work that, uh,
for wealth that it may work that way for,
uh, food, but it, uh, uh wealth is addictive
and they had, uh all sorts of Greek words
for that, like money, love, uh, wealth, addiction. Uh
And that was the problem. And, uh, uh all
of Plato's Republic uh is, uh about that, uh,
it begins with, uh Socrates, someone asking Socrates, uh
uh II, I owe some money, you know, I
really, it's hard to repay this. Predator is such
a bastard, you know, is it right that I
repay him? And Socrates said, well, suppose that, uh,
you'd, uh borrowed a weapon from somebody, you needed
a sword, uh, to fight in the army. And
now, uh, then you find out that this guy
is a real sadist. Uh, AND he wants to
hurt people with a weapon. Is it the right
thing to do to give, uh back the weapon
uh, to him because he's gonna use it to
hurt people. And, uh, uh, the, uh, the person
says, gee, I guess you're right. Socrates says, well,
it's the same thing, uh, with money, uh, if
you give money back to a creditor, the more
money he has he's going to get more and
more, uh, uh, debt addicted and, uh, he's going
to just try to run, uh, he's not going
to look for the public good anymore. He's going
to do what's good for himself. Well, we had
to study this at the University Chicago and, uh,
just as they, uh, tried to say, uh, uh,
the education, there was, uh, just an exercise in
censorship there. Uh, uh, WHAT we were told there
was, uh, the Republics all about, uh, the, uh,
the noble dictator, uh, the, the, uh, the, uh,
the, the smart guy who's running everything and, uh,
you really want, uh, uh AAA noble uh, dictator.
Uh, AND that's not what Socrates said at all.
What he said is, you know, how do you
prevent, uh, a wealthy person from taking over society?
He said, well, right now, uh, it's always the
wealthiest person or somebody from one of the wealthy
families that's going to end up, uh, as a
leader. Uh, I, if you want to avoid society,
being run by a wealth addicted class, you have
to have, uh, the, uh, uh, the dictator or,
you know, whatever you call them, uh, not have
property of his own, not to have money of
his own. You're gonna make sure that he lives
nicely. You're gonna feed him, you're gonna support him.
Uh, HE'S gonna be just a regular, he's gonna
have what the regular citizen, uh, citizen, uh, has.
But he's, uh, he's not going to have enough
wealth that he gets, gets addicted to it and,
uh, does to us what, uh, the wealthy class
is threatening to do. Uh, TODAY. Well, Socrates, uh,
most of his, uh, clients, uh, at, uh, the
academy were, uh, uh, the wealthy classes they meet
in gymnasiums. The word for school was uh in,
in your, in German language and of the European
language with gymnasium. And it meant that that was
where the wealthy people would gather uh both to
work out and exercise, but also to have their
uh political talks. Uh And uh so that Socrates
was, was trying to explain to them. Well, you
know, uh you guys are really all sort of
uh uh well addicted. And uh anyway, he, he
ended up being put to death to make a
long story short just and of course, uh the
universe that was the one thing that the University
of Chicago picked up from when they uh when
Chileans uh uh elected a uh socialist president uh
uh the Chicago, the Chicago school uh was brilliant
enough to say there's only one way to create
a free market. You have to kill everybody who
critic who says that there is an alternative. They
close, the Chicago boys closed every university economics Department
in Chile, except for the Catholic University. Uh THAT
taught uh uh Chicago school, uh free market, meaning
dictatorship, uh e economics. And uh they set a
whole terrorism campaign to kill labor union leaders to
kill uh university progressive professors uh to kill land
reformers. Uh NOT only in Chile, but all throughout
Latin America to Argentina. Uh THE death squads. Uh
YOU can't have a uh free market limiting government
if you don't have death squads uh doing just
what they did in Rome to kill all of
the opposition. Because once you have people understand that
they, uh didn't as they did in Rome. If
Jesus was saying, uh uh once they know there's
an alternative, uh then people are going to want
the alternative and there's going to be a revolution.
And, uh the idea of today's neo liberal history,
they, they've rewritten uh history when, when, uh I,
my, my Harvard group, uh from 1992 to about
2010, published fi uh five, colloquial rewriting the economic
history of the ancient, uh near East. And, uh
uh now all of uh the serios all uh
uh accept all of this. And when we begin,
almost all of the uh uh uh economic history
of uh this early period was written by economists,
not by a Serio, not by anthropologists by economists.
And they said, well, it's impossible for, uh, the
there to have canceled the debts if you did,
who is going to lend money anymore. They didn't
realize that most debts weren't lending money. They were
accrued debts when you couldn't pay because the harvest
failed or you just couldn't, uh, couldn't keep up
with your, your, your payments. Uh It's, uh they
believed that uh there, uh there couldn't be no
economy could get rich the way the near eastern
economy he did by canceling the debts because that
was a strong government and you really need uh
a free market without any government interference, like canceling
the debts, redistributing the land. And if Milton Friedman
say in a modern economist, one of the students
would get into a time machine and go back
to uh 2000 BC and Babylonia or 2500 BC
and Sumer and advise uh the rule, the rulers
saying, you know, we're here from the future to
help you. Uh Let, let me tell you how
to organize the society, you know, free market. Let
every let take that take its course. Uh Don't
cancel them, don't interfere with the economy. There never
would have been civilization. Uh And uh and the
question now is well, OK. Now, no, not only
would there never have been civilization but if the
Chicago boys, the neoliberals uh and the Washington consensus
has its way today. Are, are we going to
have the end of civilization or at least Western
civilization while the global majority goes its way? Well,
there again, I began to diverge uh
related to debt. Let me ask you this question,
what about debt that countries owe each other? Could
that kind of debt also be canceled?
Wait, what kind of debt will be canceled? Uh
DEBT that countries owe each other?
Well, uh you already had that occur in 1931.
Uh uh AFTER World War two, the uh uh
United States insisted that uh the allies pay uh
for all of the US arms exports that they'd
made uh before uh uh America entered World War
one. And so the ally said, OK, if we
have to pay America, we have to get the
money from Germany and uh they imposed uh reparations
on Germany. Uh This is the story that I've
talked uh described in my book, Super Imperialism. And
uh so the result is that this debt tangle
ended up uh causing uh a whole breakdown, the
stock market crashed in 1929. Uh The economy began
to move into the Great Depression by 1931. Uh
THE uh all the governments of the creditor and
debtor countries got together and said, OK, uh we're
uh it's not worth creating a whole depression throughout
the world, the western world. Uh JUST uh uh
to uh uh pay the uh uh uh the
war debts left over from World War one. We're
gonna have uh a moratorium on uh the war
debts. Well, by that time, it was uh already
uh too late to have uh uh uh uh
to prevent the, uh, depression from developing and, uh,
the world, uh emerged in World war two, pretty
much, uh, without debt. Uh, AND the German economic
miracle in uh 1947 was when they canceled all
of the internal German debts. Well, that was pretty
easy. Uh, BECAUSE the debts were all owed to
people who'd been Nazis. Uh, THE rich people had
got their wealth during the Nazi era. So you
were really canceling the debts to the Nazis that
became uh the uh the, the only debts that
were kept were employer debts to their employees. And
everybody was allowed to keep, uh you know, uh
a modicum of uh a bank accounts just so
that they could continue to do business and start
again. So, uh uh you had uh the allies
uh cancel uh the German debts and then again,
uh had the debts begin to mount up from
1945 by 1980 already. It was obvious that the
uh the debts couldn't be paid. Uh I, I
wrote a number of reports for unit tar, the
United Nations Institute for training and research showing that
uh the debts, uh the Global South debts couldn't
be paid. And uh indeed, in 1982 Mexico defaulted
and then uh one ne Latin American country after
another defaulted. So under the Brady Plan, the debts
were written down quite a bit. So of course,
the debts can be written down and right now
we're in a situation again, uh, because of the,
uh, America's war, uh, NATO uh war against Russia
and China and Iran. Uh, YOU have uh oil
prices going way up, uh, interest rights, uh, going
way up and you have the global South and
many uh uh East Asian countries unable and African
countries uh unable to pay uh, their foreign debt.
Uh, SO, uh, the, at least this time they
don't have to let the West cancel the debts.
They can all, they're joining together uh in the
BRICS plus, uh and the whole group uh ar
around them about the global majority uh creating an
alternative set of ins, they're deol, their economies, but
DEOL means uh we're getting rid not only of
the dollar but we're of the dollar debts we
have. And uh we're moving towards the point where
there will be an alternative uh to uh the
International Monetary Fund and the World Bank. Uh And
uh these countries by joining together can uh just
repudiate uh the dollar debts and a great debt
cancellation. Uh So yes, of course, countries can join
together.
So let me just ask you one last question
then. And uh in regards to what you describe
the story, the history you explore in the collapse
of antiquity, do you see signs of similar social,
political and economic developments happening right now in, particularly
in the West or what some, sometimes people call
the global north at least?
Well, it, it's become more and more obvious that
if you, uh if you don't cancel the predatory
debts, you're going to have debt austerity already in
the thirties. The idea of debt deflation uh was
uh voiced and we're in debt deflation again, more
and more of the income of the United States
and Europe uh is paid uh to creditors. Uh
AND uh predators have promoted, they've uh taken over
the real estate sector, the insurance sector, you have
really uh what I call the fire sector, finance
insurance and real estate are a rat a sector.
You have a rat, a class, including the monopolies
now that uh are uh all uh getting predatory
uh income in the uh in the west. This
uh that we're moving into uh what uh some
people are calling neo feudalism uh because they, they
can see that. Well, we're moving back into this
kind of polarized economy. Uh And if you don't
uh uh uh prevent a financial oligarchy from emerging
and taking over, then uh it's, you, you, you're
going to have that happened here to what happened.
Uh IN Rome, you're going to have a uh
a dark age when all the money is at
the very top of the pyramid. And you've killed
the domestic market, you've killed growth and uh you
have the population fleeing and in the Roman Empire,
more and more of the uh at the periphery,
more and more Romans were joining the barbarians. Because
it was the ro they were barbarians and the
barbarians were c more civilized. They were the German
tribes that were very egalitarian. They were the Germanic
tribes. You had a whole uh uh a whole
different ethic than the decadent uh Ro Roman uh
ethic. Well, you're having that same split today uh
between the, uh what uh uh the uh European
uh union had Joseph Burrell pos uh the uh
European Garden as opposed to the jungle everywhere out
there, the jungle is uh uh really democracy. Uh
The European Garden is autocracy. But the uh the
Americans say that the autocracy is the demo uh
democracy. Is anyone who supports the American autocracy and
autocracy. Is anyone uh who, who uh uh government
uh that plays a role in moderating and preventing
an oligarchy from developing uh and being what uh
uh the spirit of democracy is supposed to be
all about. So we're in a kind of world
of or will and uh uh double think uh
uh today. But uh yes, uh uh uh uh
uh the, the way to uh uh promote this
uh it takes a revolution. And uh the uh
e economic, the role of the economic uh uh
uh uh profession is to say there's no alternative.
We're in uh the end of history. End of
history is a uh by Darwinian survival. We have
uh the wealthy uh frontiers uh Wall Street City
of England, the Paris tours uh Frankfurt, uh, uh
Bank of Tokyo. Um We, this is, uh really
the, uh, the apex of history we've won by
the survival of the fittest. Uh, AND, uh, uh,
uh, we don't have to go anymore. And so
there are no alternative. Well, you have the whole
rest of the world now. Uh, THANKS to the,
uh, America, uh, the NATO war against Russia and
Ukraine and now, uh, the near Eastern Mass, uh,
you have uh uh the whole world saying uh
this is wrong, morally wrong. And we're gonna make
a new uh society. And that is the, the,
the, the feeling that uh there is uh something
morally wrong. You realize that uh what uh what
used to be religion in the West is economic,
neo liberal free markets, meaning uh free for uh
the oligarchy to do whatever it wants uh with
its riches and free from any government attempt to
tax or to regulate the economy, to prevent monopoly
rents uh to tax uh land rent. Uh AND
to uh make uh money and credit a public
function uh instead of a privatized function. So, uh
you're having fun finally, that uh uh awareness that
uh Margaret Thatcher was wrong, there is an alternative.
Uh And if you don't take it, you're gonna
end up through the west just the way England
ended up under Margaret Thatcher, uh and her follower
Tony Blair that uh tried to go even further
further than Thatcher did in uh uh privatizing uh
transportation and uh uh basically destroying the British economy.
So, uh I'm leaving links to your books in
the description box of the interview, Doctor Hudson. Would
you also just like to briefly tell people about
what your upcoming book would be about?
Well, I just finally published all of my uh
academic uh art uh academic articles that I've written
um in my Harvard uh articles and others and
uh uh the uh Temples of Enterprise uh where
I talk, I described the origin of money uh
in Babylonia, the origin of interest rates, the origins
of land tenure. And really the origins of the
enterprise were organized by the temples and the palaces,
uh not by individual merchants. Uh You need a
central organizing principle. So I published all of these,
but the most accessible books are the uh clap
uh uh the uh collapse of Antiquity for what
happened in Greece and Rome and the first book
of the series and Forgive them their debts. Where
I talked about what uh I've described today. How
did debts begin? How did the uh debt cancellations
begin? And uh uh what was Jesus really saying
in his first sermon? And uh why did the
Christians hate it so much?
Great. So, Doctor Hudson, thank you so much again
for accepting the invitation. It's been an honor to
talk with you.
It would be nice if you could transcribe this.
Yes. Yes, I will do. That with a little
bit of help from A I, uh, I will,
uh, you have to look at what a I
did. You have to go over it?
Yes. Yes. But, but, but
still a human. Uh, OTHERWISE I thought of dread
what a I is doing to society, uh, uh,
these days, uh, uh, I could give you that.
That's another show. That's another
show. Hi, guys. Thank you for watching this interview.
Until the end. If you liked it, please share
it. Leave a like and hit the subscription button.
The show is brought to you by the N
Lights learning and development. Then differently check the website
at N lights.com and also please consider supporting the
show on Patreon or paypal. I would also like
to give a huge thank you to my main
patrons and paypal supporters, Perera Larson, Jerry Muller and
Frederick Suno Bernard Seche O of Alex Adam Castle
Matthew Whitten Bear. No wolf, Tim Ho Erica LJ
Connors, Philip Forrest Connolly. Then the Met Robert Wine
in NAI Z Mark Nevs calling in Holbrook Field,
Governor Mikel Stormer Samuel Andre Francis for Agns Ferus
and H her meal and Lain Jung Y and
the K Hes Mark Smith J Tom Hummel Sran
David Sloan Wilson. Ya dear, Roman Roach Diego, Jan
Punter, Romani Charlotte Bli, Nico Barba, Adam Hunt Pavlo
Stassi, Nale medicine, Gary G Alman Sam of Zal
Ari and YPJ Barboa, Julian Price, Edward Hall, Eden
Broner Douglas Fry Franca. Beto Lati Gilon Cortez or
Solis Scott Zachary ftdw Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul
Giorgio, Luke Loki, Georgio Theophano, Chris Williams and Peter
Wo David Williams, the Ausa Anton Erickson Charles Murray,
Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralie Chevalier, Bangalore Larry Dey,
Junior, Old Ebon, Starry Michael Bailey then Spur by
Robert Grassy Zorn, Jeff mcmahon, Jake Zul Barnabas Radick,
Mark Kempel, Thomas Dvor Luke Neeson, Chris Tory Kimberley
Johnson, Benjamin Gilbert Jessica. A week in the Brendan
Nicholas Carlson, Ismael Bensley Man, George Katis Valentine Steinman,
Perras, Kate Van Goler, Alexander, Abert Liam Dan Biar
Masoud Ali Mohammadi Perpendicular Jer Urla. Good enough Gregory
Hastings David Pins of Sean Nelson, Mike Levin and
Jos Net. A special thanks to my producers, these
our web, Jim Frank Luca Stina, Tom Vig and
Bernard N Cortes Dixon, Bendik Muller Thomas Trumble, Catherine
and Patrick Tobin, John Carlman, Negro, Nick Ortiz and
Nick Golden. And to my executive producers, Matthew Lavender,
Sergi, Adrian Bogdan Knit and Rosie. Thank you for
all